- [Section 15.5- Class templates with Member functions](#section-155--class-templates-with-member-functions)
  - [Type template parameters in member functions](#type-template-parameters-in-member-functions)
  - [Injected class names](#injected-class-names)
  - [Where to define member functions for class templates outside the class](#where-to-define-member-functions-for-class-templates-outside-the-class)


# Section 15.5- Class templates with Member functions


```cpp
#include <iostream>

template <typename T> struct Pair {
  T first{};
  T second{};
};

// Here's a deduction guide for our Pair (required in C++17 or older)
// Pair objects initialized with arguments of type T and T should deduce to
// Pair<T>
template <typename T> Pair(T, T) -> Pair<T>;

int main() {
  Pair<int> p1{5, 6}; // instantiates Pair<int> and creates object p1
  std::cout << p1.first << ' ' << p1.second << '\n';

  Pair<double> p2{1.2, 3.4}; // instantiates Pair<double> and creates object p2
  std::cout << p2.first << ' ' << p2.second << '\n';

  Pair<double> p3{
      7.8, 9.0}; // creates object p3 using prior definition for Pair<double>
  std::cout << p3.first << ' ' << p3.second << '\n';

  return 0;
}
```
## Type template parameters in member functions

Type template parameters defined as part of a class template parameter declaration can be used both as the type of data members and as the type of member function parameters.

```cpp

// Convert from struct to a class
#include <ios> // for std::boolalpha
#include <iostream>

template <typename T> class Pair {
private:
  T m_first{};
  T m_second{};

public:
  // When we define a member function inside the class definition,
  // the template parameter declaration belonging to the class applies

  // within the scope of our Pair<T> class template, any use of Pair will be treated as if we had written Pair<T> instead
  Pair(const T &first, const T &second) : m_first{first}, m_second{second} {}

  bool isEqual(const Pair<T> &pair);
};

// When we define a member function outside the class definition,
// we need to resupply a template parameter declaration
// - Also, when we define a member function outside of the class, we need to
// qualify the member function name with the fully templated name of the class
// template (Pair<T>::isEqual, not Pair::isEqual).
template <typename T> bool Pair<T>::isEqual(const Pair<T> &pair) {
  return m_first == pair.m_first && m_second == pair.m_second;
}

int main() {
  Pair p1{5, 6}; // uses CTAD to infer type Pair<int>
  std::cout << std::boolalpha << "isEqual(5, 6): " << p1.isEqual(Pair{5, 6})
            << '\n';
  std::cout << std::boolalpha << "isEqual(5, 7): " << p1.isEqual(Pair{5, 7})
            << '\n';

  return 0;
}
```
First, because our class has private members, it is not an aggregate, and
therefore can’t use aggregate initialization. Instead, we have to initialize
our class objects using a constructor.

Since our class data members are of type T, we make the parameters of our
constructor type const T&, so the user can supply initialization values of
the same type.
* Because T might be expensive to copy, it’s safer to pass by const reference
than by value.

- Note that when we define a member function inside the class template
definition, we don’t need to provide a template parameter declaration for the
member function. Such member functions implicitly use the class template
parameter declaration.

Second, we don’t need deduction guides for CTAD to work with non-aggregate
classes. A matching constructor provides the compiler with the information it
needs to deduce the template parameters from the initializers.



## Injected class names

In a prior lesson, we noted that the name of a constructor must match the name
of the class. But in our class template for Pair\<T> above, we named our
constructor Pair, not Pair\<T>. Somehow this still works, even though the names
don’t match.

<mark>Within the scope of a class, the unqualified name of the class is called an
injected class name</mark>. In a class template, the injected class name serves as
shorthand for the fully templated name.

Because Pair is the injected class name of Pair\<T>, within the scope of our
Pair\<T> class template, any use of Pair will be treated as if we had written
Pair\<T> instead. Therefore, although we named the constructor Pair, the compiler
treats it as if we had written Pair\<T> instead. The names now match!

This means that we can also define our isEqual() member function like this:

```cpp
template <typename T>
bool Pair<T>::isEqual(
    const Pair &pair) // note the parameter has type Pair, not Pair<T>
{
  return m_first == pair.m_first && m_second == pair.m_second;
}
```


<mark>Because this is a definition for a member function of Pair\<T>, we’re in the
scope of the Pair\<T> class template. Therefore, any use of Pair is shorthand
for Pair\<T>!</mark>


## Where to define member functions for class templates outside the class

* With member functions for class templates, the compiler needs to see both:
  - the class definition (ensure member function template is declared as part of the class)
  - the template member function definition (to know how to instantiate the template).
    - Therefore, we typically want to define both a class and its member function templates in the same location.

* When a member function template is defined inside the class definition
    - the template member function definition is part of the class definition
      - so anywhere the class definition can be seen, the template member function definition can also be seen.
        - This makes things easy (at the cost of cluttering our class definition).

* When a member function template is defined outside the class definition
  * it should generally be defined immediately below the class definition.
    * That way, anywhere the class definition can be seen, the member function template definitions immediately below the class definition will also be seen.

* In the typical case where a class is defined in a header file,
  * this means any member function templates defined outside the class should also be defined in the same header file, below the class definition.

