- [15.6 Static Member Variables](#156-static-member-variables)
  - [Example of static local variables](#example-of-static-local-variables)
  - [Static Member Variables](#static-member-variables)
  - [Static members are not associated with class objects](#static-members-are-not-associated-with-class-objects)
  - [Defining and initializing static member variables](#defining-and-initializing-static-member-variables)
    - [Static Member definition across multiple files](#static-member-definition-across-multiple-files)
  - [Initialization of static member variables inside the class definition](#initialization-of-static-member-variables-inside-the-class-definition)
  - [An example of static member variables](#an-example-of-static-member-variables)
  - [Only static members may use type deduction (auto and CTAD)](#only-static-members-may-use-type-deduction-auto-and-ctad)

# 15.6 Static Member Variables

## Example of static local variables

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int generateID()
{
    static int s_id{ 0 }; // static local variable
    return ++s_id;
}

int main()
{
    std::cout << generateID() << '\n';
    std::cout << generateID() << '\n';
    std::cout << generateID() << '\n';

    return 0;

/*
Prints:
1
2
3
*/

}
```

- Note that static local variable s_id has kept its value across multiple function calls.

- Class types bring two more uses for the static keyword:
  - static member variables
  - static member functions



## Static Member Variables

- Consider the following class:
```cpp
#include <iostream>

struct Something
{
    int value{ 1 };
};

int main()
{
    Something first{};
    Something second{};

    first.value = 2;

    std::cout << first.value << '\n';
    std::cout << second.value << '\n';

    return 0;
}

/*
prints:
2
1
*/
```

- When we instantiate a class object, each object gets its own copy of all normal member variables.
  - In this case, because we have declared two Something class objects, we end up with two copies of value:
    - first.value, and second.value.
    - first.value is distinct from second.value. 

- Member variables of a class can be made static by using the static keyword.
  - Unlike normal member variables, <mark>static member variables are shared by all objects of the class.</mark>

Consider the following program

```cpp
#include <iostream>

struct Something
{
    static int s_value; // now static
};

int Something::s_value{ 1 }; // initialize s_value to 1

int main()
{
    Something first{};
    Something second{};

    first.s_value = 2;

// These values will be the same. Since s_value is static it is the same variable shared across all objects of the class.
    std::cout << first.s_value << '\n';
    // 
    std::cout << second.s_value << '\n';
    return 0;
}
/*
prints:
2
2
*/
```

- Because s_value is a static member variable, s_value is shared between all objects of the class.
  - Consequently, first.s_value is the same variable as second.s_value.
- The above program shows that the value we set using first can be accessed using second!


## Static members are not associated with class objects

- Although you can access static members through objects of the class (example above)
  - static members exist even if no objects of the class have been instantiated!
    - This makes sense: they are created at the start of the program and destroyed at the end of the program
      - their lifetime is not bound to a class object like a normal member.


<mark>Essentially, static members are global variables that live inside the scope region of the class. There is very little difference between a static member of a class and a normal variable inside a namespace.</mark>


>[!NOTE] Key insight
Static members are global variables that live inside the scope region of the class.

- Because static member s_value exists independently of any class objects
  - it can be accessed directly using the class name and the scope resolution operator
  - (in this case, Something::s_value):

```cpp
class Something
{
public:
    static int s_value; // declares the static member variable
};

// declration not subject to access controls (private or protected)
int Something::s_value{ 1 }; // defines the static member variable (we'll discuss this section below)

int main()
{
    // note: we're not instantiating any objects of type Something

    Something::s_value = 2;
    std::cout << Something::s_value << '\n';
    return 0;
}
```
- s_value is referenced by class name Something rather than through an object
- Note that we have not even instantiated an object of type Something, but we are still able to access and use Something::s_value.
- <mark>This is the preferred method for accessing static members.</mark>


>[!NOTE] Best practice
Access static members using the class name and the scope resolution operator (::).

## Defining and initializing static member variables

- When we declare a static member variable inside a class type
  - we’re telling the compiler about the existence of a static member variable
    - but not actually defining it (much like a forward declaration).
  - Because static member variables are essentially global variables
    - you must explicitly define (and optionally initialize) the static member outside of the class, in the global scope.
    - In the example above, we do so via this line:
```cpp
int Something::s_value{ 1 }; // defines the static member variable
```

- This line serves two purposes:
  - it instantiates the static member variable (just like a global variable)
  - initializes it
  
- In this case, we’re providing the initialization value 1
- If no initializer is provided, static member variables are zero-initialized by default.
---
- Note that this static member definition is not subject to access controls:
  - <mark>you can define and initialize the value even if it’s declared as private (or protected) in the class<mark>
  - (as definitions are not considered to be a form of access).
---
### Static Member definition across multiple files
- For non-template classes
  - if the class is defined in a header (.h) file
    - the static member definition is usually placed in the associated code file for the class (e.g. Something.cpp).
  - If the class is defined in a source (.cpp) file
    - the static member definition is usually placed directly underneath the class
- <mark>Do not put the static member definition in a header file (much like a global variable, if that header file gets included more than once, you’ll end up with multiple definitions, which will cause a linker error).</mark>
---
- <mark>For template classes, the (templated) static member definition is typically placed directly underneath the template class.</mark>


## Initialization of static member variables inside the class definition

There are a few shortcuts to the above.

---
- First, when the static member is:
  -  a constant integral type (which includes char and bool)
  -  or a const enum
     -  the static member can be initialized inside the class definition:
```cpp
class Whatever
{
public:
    static const int s_value{ 4 }; // a static const int can be defined and initialized directly
};
```

In the above example, because the static member variable is a const int, no explicit definition line is needed. This shortcut is allowed because these specific const types are compile-time constants.

---

- inline variables are variables that are allowed to have multiple definitions.
  - C++17 allows static members to be inline variables:
```cpp
class Whatever
{
public:
    static inline int s_value{ 4 }; // a static inline variable can be defined and initialized directly
};
```

- Such variables can be initialized inside the class definition regardless of whether they are constant or not.
- This is the preferred method of defining and initializing static members.

---

- Because constexpr members are implicitly inline (as of C++17)
  - static constexpr members can also be initialized inside the class definition without explicit use of the inline keyword:

```cpp
#include <string_view>

class Whatever
{
public:
    static constexpr double s_value{ 2.2 }; // ok
    static constexpr std::string_view s_view{ "Hello" }; // this even works for classes that support constexpr initialization
};
```

>[!NOTE] Best practice
Make your static members inline or constexpr so they can be initialized inside the class definition.

## An example of static member variables

- Why use static variables inside classes?
  - Assign a unique ID to every instance of the class. Here’s an example:
```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Something
{
private:
    static inline int s_idGenerator { 1 };
    int m_id {};

public:
    // grab the next value from the id generator
    Something() : m_id { s_idGenerator++ }
    {
    }

    int getID() const { return m_id; }
};

int main()
{
    Something first{};
    Something second{};
    Something third{};

    std::cout << first.getID() << '\n';
    std::cout << second.getID() << '\n';
    std::cout << third.getID() << '\n';
    return 0;
}
/* This program prints:
1
2
3 */
```

- Because s_idGenerator is shared by all Something objects, when a new Something object is created, the constructor initializes m_id with the current value of s_idGenerator and then increments the value for the next object.
- This guarantees that each instantiated Something object receives a unique id (incremented in the order of creation).

---

- Giving each object a unique ID can help when debugging
  - as it can be used to differentiate objects that otherwise have identical data.
  - This is particularly true when working with arrays of data.

- Static member variables are also useful when the class needs to utilize a lookup table
  - (e.g. an array used to store a set of pre-calculated values).
  - By making the lookup table static, only one copy exists for all objects
    - rather than making a copy for each object instantiated
  - This can save substantial amounts of memory.


## Only static members may use type deduction (auto and CTAD)
- A static member may use
  - auto to deduce its type from the initializer
  - or Class Template Argument Deduction (CTAD) to deduce template type arguments from the initializer.
- Non-static members may not use auto or CTAD.

---

The reasons for this distinction being made are quite complicated, but <mark>boil down to there being certain cases that can occur with non-static members that lead to ambiguity or non-intuitive results</mark>. This does not occur for static members.
- Thus non-static members are restricted from using these features, whereas static members are not.

```cpp
#include <utility> // for std::pair<T, U>

class Foo
{
private:
    auto m_x { 5 };           // auto not allowed for non-static members
    std::pair m_v { 1, 2.3 }; // CTAD not allowed for non-static members

    static inline auto s_x { 5 };           // auto allowed for static members
    static inline std::pair s_v { 1, 2.3 }; // CTAD allowed for static members

public:
    Foo() {};
};

int main()
{
    Foo foo{};

    return 0;
}
```
