- [std::vector and the unsigned length and subscript problem](#stdvector-and-the-unsigned-length-and-subscript-problem)
  - [Container length sign problem](#container-length-sign-problem)
  - [A review: sign conversions are narrowing conversions, except when constexpr](#a-review-sign-conversions-are-narrowing-conversions-except-when-constexpr)
  - [The length and indices of std::vector have type size\_type](#the-length-and-indices-of-stdvector-have-type-size_type)
  - [Getting the length of a std::vector using the size() member function or std::size()](#getting-the-length-of-a-stdvector-using-the-size-member-function-or-stdsize)
  - [Getting the length of a std::vector using std::ssize() C++20](#getting-the-length-of-a-stdvector-using-stdssize-c20)
  - [Accessing array elements using operator\[\] does no bounds checking](#accessing-array-elements-using-operator-does-no-bounds-checking)
  - [Accessing array elements using the at() member function does runtime bounds checking](#accessing-array-elements-using-the-at-member-function-does-runtime-bounds-checking)
  - [Indexing std::vector with a constexpr signed int](#indexing-stdvector-with-a-constexpr-signed-int)
  - [Indexing std::vector with a non-constexpr value](#indexing-stdvector-with-a-non-constexpr-value)
    - [Tip](#tip)


# std::vector and the unsigned length and subscript problem

In the prior lesson 16.2 -- Introduction to std::vector and list constructors, we introduced 
- operator\[], which can be used to subscript an array to access an element.

In this lesson, we’ll look at other ways to access array elements, as well as a 
- few different ways to get the length of an container class (the number of elements currently in the container class).

But before we can do that, we need to discuss one major mistake that the designers of C++ made, and how it affects all the container classes in the C++ standard library.

## Container length sign problem

- Let’s start with an assertion:
  - the data type used for subscripting an array 
    - should match the data type used for storing the length of the array.
  -  This is so that all elements in the longest possible array can be indexed, and no more.


As Bjarne Stroustrup recalls, 
- when the container classes in the C++ standard library was being designed (circa 1997), 
  - the designers had to choose whether to make the length (and array subscripts) signed or unsigned. 
    - They chose to make them unsigned.

The reasons given for this: the subscripts of the standard library array types can’t be negative, 
- using an unsigned type allows arrays of greater length due to the extra bit (something that was important in the 16-bit days), - - and range-checking the subscript requires one conditional check instead of two 
  - (since no check was needed to ensure the index was less than 0).

In retrospect, this is generally regarded as having been the wrong choice. 
- We now understand that using unsigned values to try to enforce non-negativity doesn’t work 
  - due to the implicit conversion rules (since a negative signed integer will just implicitly convert to a large unsigned integer, producing a garbage result), 
  - the extra bit of range typically isn’t needed on 32-bit or 64-bit systems (since you probably aren’t creating arrays with more than 2 billion elements), 
  - and the commonly used operator\[] doesn’t do range-checking anyway.

In lesson 4.5 -- Unsigned integers, and why to avoid them, we discussed the reasons why we prefer to use signed values to hold quantities. We also noted that mixing signed and unsigned values is a recipe for unexpected behavior. So the fact that the standard library container classes use unsigned values for the length (and indices) is problematic, as it 
- makes it impossible to avoid unsigned values when using these types.

For now, we are stuck with this choice and the unnecessary complexity it causes.


## A review: sign conversions are narrowing conversions, except when constexpr 

Before we proceed further, let’s quickly recap some material from lesson 10.4 -- Narrowing conversions, list initialization, and constexpr initializers regarding sign conversions (integral conversions from signed to unsigned or vice-versa) because we’ll be talking about these a lot in this chapter.

- <mark> Sign conversions are considered to be narrowing conversions because a signed or unsigned type cannot hold all the values contained in the range of the opposing type</mark>.
  - When such a conversion would be performed at runtime, the compiler will issue an error in contexts where narrowing conversions are disallowed (such as in list initialization), and may or may not issue a warning in other contexts where such a conversion is performed.

For example:
```cpp
#include <iostream>

void foo(unsigned int)
{
}

int main()
{
    int s { 5 };

    [[maybe_unused]] unsigned int u { s }; // compile error: list initialization disallows narrowing conversion
    foo(s);                                // possible warning: copy initialization allows narrowing conversion

    return 0;
}
```
In the above example, the initialization of variable u produces a compilation error because narrowing conversions are disallowed when doing list initialization. The call to foo() performs copy initialization, which does allow narrowing conversions, and which may or may not produce a warning depending on how aggressive the compiler is in producing sign conversion warnings. For example, both GCC and Clang will produce warnings in this case when compiler flag -Wsign-conversion is used.

However, <mark>if the value to be sign converted is constexpr and can be converted to an equivalent value in the opposing type, the sign conversion is not considered to be narrowing.</mark> This is because the compiler can guarantee that the conversion is safe, or halt the compilation process.
```cpp
#include <iostream>

void foo(unsigned int)
{
}

int main()
{
    constexpr int s { 5 };                 // now constexpr
    [[maybe_unused]] unsigned int u { s }; // ok: s is constexpr and can be converted safely, not a narrowing conversion
    foo(s);                                // ok: s is constexpr and can be converted safely, not a narrowing conversion

    return 0;
}
```
In this case, since s is constexpr and the value to be converted (5) can be represented as an unsigned value, the conversion is not considered to be narrowing and can be performed implicitly without issue.

<mark>This non-narrowing constexpr conversion (from constexpr int to constexpr std::size_t) will be something we make use of a lot.</mark>

## The length and indices of std::vector have type size_type 

In lesson 10.7 -- Typedefs and type aliases, we mentioned that typedefs and type aliases are often used in cases where we need a name for a type that may vary (e.g. because it is implementation-defined). For example std::size_t is a typedef for some large unsigned integral type, usually unsigned long or unsigned long long.

<mark>Each of the standard library container classes defines a nested typedef member named size_type (sometimes written as T::size_type), which is an alias for the type used for the length (and indices, if supported) of the container.</mark>



You’ll typically see size_type appear in documentation and in compiler warnings/error messages. For example, <mark>this documentation for the size() member function of std::vector indicates that size() returns a value of size_type.</mark>

>[!NOTE] Related content
We cover nested typedefs in lesson 15.3 -- Nested types (member types).

size_type is almost always an alias for std::size_t, but can be overridden (in rare cases) to use a different type.

>[!NOTE] Key insight
size_type is a nested typedef defined in standard library container classes, used as the type for the length (and indices, if supported) of the container class.

size_type defaults to std::size_t, and since this is almost never changed, we can reasonably assume size_type is an alias for std::size_t.

---

**For advanced readers**
- All of the standard library containers except std::array use std::allocator to allocate memory. For these containers, T::size_type is derived from the size_type of the allocator used. Since std::allocator can allocate up to std::size_t bytes of memory, std::allocator\<T>::size_type is defined as std::size_t. Therefore, T::size_type defaults to std::size_t.

- Only in cases where a custom allocator whose T::size_type is defined as something other than std::size_t will a container’s T::size_type be something other than std::size_t. This is rare and something done on a per-application basis, so it’s generally safe to assume T::size_type will be std::size_t unless your application is using such a custom allocator (and you will know if that is the case).

--- 

<mark>When accessing the size_type member of a container class, we must scope qualify it with the fully templated name of the container class. For example, std::vector\<int>::size_type.</mark>

## Getting the length of a std::vector using the size() member function or std::size()

We can ask a <mark>container class object for its length using the size() member function</mark> (which returns the length as unsigned size_type):


```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>

int main()
{
    std::vector prime { 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 };
    std::cout << "length: " << prime.size() << '\n'; // returns length as type `size_type` (alias for `std::size_t`)
    return 0;
}

/* This prints:

length: 5 */
```

Unlike std::string and std::string_view, which have both a length() and a size() member function (that do the same thing), std::vector (and most other container types in C++) only has size(). And now you understand why the length of a container is sometimes ambiguously called its size.

In C++17, we can also <mark>use the std::size() non-member function</mark> (which for container classes just calls the size() member function).
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>

int main()
{
    std::vector prime { 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 };
    std::cout << "length: " << std::size(prime); // C++17, returns length as type `size_type` (alias for `std::size_t`)

    return 0;
}
```
---

**For advanced readers**
Because **std::size() can also be used on non-decayed C-style arrays**, this method is sometimes favored over the using the size() member function (particularly when writing function templates that can accept either a container class or non-decayed C-style array argument).

We discuss C-style array decay in lesson 17.8 -- C-style array decay.

---

<mark>If we want to use either of the above methods to store the length in a variable with a signed type, this will likely result in a signed/unsigned conversion warning or error. The simplest thing to do here is static_cast the result to the desired type:</mark>

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>

int main()
{
    std::vector prime { 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 };
    int length { static_cast<int>(prime.size()) }; // static_cast return value to int
    std::cout << "length: " << length ;

    return 0;
}
```

## Getting the length of a std::vector using std::ssize() C++20



C++20 introduces the std::ssize() non-member function, which returns the length as a large signed integral type (usually std::ptrdiff_t, which is the type normally used as the signed counterpart to std::size_t):
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>

int main()
{
    std::vector prime{ 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 };
    std::cout << "length: " << std::ssize(prime); // C++20, returns length as a large signed integral type

    return 0;
}
```
<mark>This is the only function of the three which returns the length as a signed type.</mark>

If you want to use this method to store the length in a variable with a signed type, you have a couple of options.
- First, because the int type may be smaller than the signed type returned by std::ssize(), if you are going to assign the length to an int variable, 
  - you should static_cast the result to int to make any such conversion explicit (otherwise you might get a narrowing conversion warning or error):
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>

int main()
{
    std::vector prime{ 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 };
    int length { static_cast<int>(std::ssize(prime)) }; // static_cast return value to int
    std::cout << "length: " << length;

    return 0;
}
```

Alternatively, you can use auto to have the compiler deduce the correct signed type to use for the variable:


```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>

int main()
{
    std::vector prime{ 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 };
    auto length { std::ssize(prime) }; // use auto to deduce signed type, as returned by std::ssize()
    std::cout << "length: " << length;

    return 0;
}
```
## Accessing array elements using operator\[] does no bounds checking

In the prior lesson, we introduced the subscript operator (operator\[]):
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>

int main()
{
    std::vector prime{ 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 };

    std::cout << prime[3];  // print the value of element with index 3 (7)
    std::cout << prime[9]; // invalid index (undefined behavior)

    return 0;
}
```

operator\[] does not do bounds checking. The index for operator\[] can be non-const. We’ll discuss this further in a later section.

## Accessing array elements using the at() member function does runtime bounds checking

The array container classes support another method for accessing an array. <mark>The at() member function can be used to do array access with runtime bounds checking:</mark>
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>

int main()
{
    std::vector prime{ 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 };

    std::cout << prime.at(3); // print the value of element with index 3
    std::cout << prime.at(9); // invalid index (throws exception)

    return 0;
}
```

In the above example, the call to prime.at(3) checks to ensure the index 3 is valid, and because it is, it returns a reference to array element 3. We can then print this value. However, the call to prime.at(9) fails (at runtime) because 9 is not a valid index for this array. Instead of returning a reference, the at() function generates an error that terminates the program.

---

**For advanced readers**
When the at() member function encounters an out-of-bounds index, it actually throws an exception of type std::out_of_range. If the exception is not handled, the program will be terminated. We cover exceptions and how to handle them in chapter 27.

---

Just like operator\[], the index passed to at() can be non-const.

<mark>Because it does runtime bounds checking on every call, at() is slower (but safer) than operator\[]</mark>. Despite being less safe, operator\[] is typically used over at(), primarily because it’s better to do bounds checking prior to indexing, so we don’t try to use an invalid index in the first place.

## Indexing std::vector with a constexpr signed int

<mark>When indexing a std::vector with a constexpr (signed) int, we can let the compiler implicitly convert this to a std::size_t without it being a narrowing conversion:</mark>

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>

int main()
{
    std::vector prime{ 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 };

    std::cout << prime[3] << '\n';     // okay: 3 converted from int to std::size_t, not a narrowing conversion

    constexpr int index { 3 };         // constexpr
    std::cout << prime[index] << '\n'; // okay: constexpr index implicitly converted to std::size_t, not a narrowing conversion

    return 0;
}
```

## Indexing std::vector with a non-constexpr value

<mark>The subscripts used to index an array can be non-const:<mark>

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>

int main()
{
    std::vector prime{ 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 };

    std::size_t index { 3 };           // non-constexpr
    std::cout << prime[index] << '\n'; // operator[] expects an index of type std::size_t, no conversion required

    return 0;
}
```
However, as per our best practices (4.5 -- Unsigned integers, and why to avoid them), we generally want to avoid using unsigned types to hold quantities.

<mark>When our subscript is a non-constexpr signed value value, we run into problems:</mark>

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>

int main()
{
    std::vector prime{ 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 };

    int index { 3 };                   // non-constexpr
    std::cout << prime[index] << '\n'; // possible warning: index implicitly converted to std::size_t, narrowing conversion

    return 0;
}
```

In this example, index is a non-constexpr signed int. The subscript of operator\[] defined as part of std::vector has type size_type (an alias for std::size_t). Therefore, when we call prime\[index], our <mark>signed int must be converted to std::size_t.</mark>

Such a conversion should not be dangerous (because the index of a std::vector is expected to be non-negative, and a non-negative signed value will safely convert to an unsigned value). But when performed at runtime, this is considered to be a narrowing conversion, and your compiler should produce a warning about this being an unsafe conversion (if it doesn’t, you should consider modifying your warnings so that it does).

Because array subscripting is common, and each such conversion will generate a warning, this can easily clutter up your compilation log with spurious warnings. Or, if you have “treat warning as errors” enabled, it will halt your compilation.

There are many possible ways to avoid this issue (e.g. <mark>static_cast your int to a std::size_t every time you index an array</mark>), but all inevitably end up cluttering or complicating your code in some way. The simplest thing to do in this case is <mark>use a variable of type std::size_t as your index, and do not use this variable for anything but indexing<mark>. That way you’ll avoid any non-constexpr conversions in the first place.

### Tip
Another good alternative is instead of indexing the std::vector itself, index the result of the data() member function:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>

int main()
{
    std::vector prime{ 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 };

    int index { 3 };                          // non-constexpr signed value
    std::cout << prime.data()[index] << '\n'; // okay: no sign conversion warnings

    return 0;
}
```

Under the hood, <mark>std::vector holds its elements in a C-style array. The data() member function returns a pointer to this underlying C-style array, which we can then index. Since C-style arrays allow indexing with both signed and unsigned types, we don’t run into any sign conversion issues.</mark> We discuss C-style arrays further in lessons 17.7 -- Introduction to C-style arrays and 17.8 -- C-style array decay.

